---
calendar: security
post_year: 2019
post_day: 21
title: Safe travels for the road warrior
image: >-
  https://i1.wp.com/p3.no/filmpolitiet/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/Mad-Max-Fury-Road-bilde-5.jpg
ingress: >-
  In business travel, a road warrior is a person that uses mobile devices such
  as tablet, laptop, smartphone and internet connectivity while traveling to
  conduct business. The term spawns from the movie Mad Max 2, starring Mel
  Gibson.
authors:
  - Didrik Sæther
---
This is in no way a definitive guide. Before you strap on your tinfoil-hat, rember that a few of these tricks perhaps are a little overboard. We try to provide you a guide for moderate to high security towards the everyday band of marauders. 

## **Use a VPN.** 

VPN is a safe and easy way to protect yourself. Often your company will provide one, and if not, you can check out commercial alternatives. Stay clear of "free" alternatives\
preserves logs.\
The point of VPN is to generate a private network between you and a machine you trust, where your traffic is “tunneled” through this network.

## **Use your cellphone as a roaming hotspot.**

Instead of connecting to _Free public Wi-Fi_, which we know that in most cases are run by the bad guys, and provides no security, you can use your cellphone as a roaming hotspot for your devices. Watch out for high data fees.

## **Disable biometric unlocking of device.**

If you know you are going to enter a country that allows the authorities to force you give up your biometric credentials, like fingerprint or facial id, this should be disabled. You are still allowed to forget a PIN or password.

On a side note; some countries may not allow you to enter a device into the country which you cannot unlock, so this can mean you will be denied access to the country.

## **The Mikado-trick.**

If you at some point in your travels have to leave your laptop, let’s say for example in the hotel room. Take a bunch of Mikado sticks, drop them over your laptop, and snap a picture.

The randomness generated by the sticks are impossible to replicate and will provide an easy enough verification method to check if something has changed from when you left it.

When leaving your laptop, you should propably turn it off. [Rob Fuller showed that for 50$ anyone can extract creds from a locked laptop.](https://room362.com/post/2016/snagging-creds-from-locked-machines/)

## **Password manager travel mode**

If you are using a password manager (and you should!!), you can enable travel mode. This removes password vaults from your devices, except those that you mark as “safe for travel”. So, if you have access to a company password vault, you should perhaps remove that vault before entering a country that would like that information. \
[Last year Hans Kristian wrote about password managers](https://security.christmas/2018/16), and why you should use one.

## **Buy it in the store.**

We know from the files Edward Snowden leaked that NSA has the capability to intercept a parcel from i.e. Amazon to do hardware modifications. [This was shown with certain Cisco routers](https://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2014/05/photos-of-an-nsa-upgrade-factory-show-cisco-router-getting-implant/). 

If you go to your local computer-store, and buy the device there, and make sure that it does not leave your sight from when you pick it up, you can trust that it has not been tampered with.

## **Visiting countries that are known for nation-state hacking?**

If you are visiting places or countries that put you at high risk of information security theft or hacking, you should use a dedicated phone/tablet/pc for travels that get wiped after your visit.

Wait to turn on your devices to you have left the airport, as this is where inteligence services have the highest presence.

[Use a USB-condom if you need to charge your phone](https://lifehacker.com/use-a-usb-condom-to-protect-your-devices-at-public-char-1840149971). A public charger is never a good thing..

## **Final thoughts**

* Keep your devices updated with the latest security updates. This is important for OS, but also with updates for your apps.
* Encrypt your devices, and do regular backup to a secure off-site location.
